From bagleyd@source.asset.com  Tue May 16 11:06:02 1995
Return-Path: <bagleyd@source.asset.com>
Received: from source.asset.com by life.ai.mit.edu (4.1/AI-4.10) for /com/archive/cube-lovers id AA21834; Tue, 16 May 95 11:06:02 EDT
Received: by source.asset.com (AIX 3.2/UCB 5.64/4.03)
          id AA44189; Tue, 16 May 1995 11:07:21 -0400
Date: Tue, 16 May 1995 11:07:21 -0400
From: bagleyd@source.asset.com (David A. Bagley)
Message-Id: <9505161507.AA44189@source.asset.com>
To: cube-lovers@ai.mit.edu
Subject: DINOSAUR RUBIK'S CUBE

Hi
  I just completed coding a new puzzle called xdino.  It is the Rubik's
Dinosaur Puzzle recently mentioned.  (A cube with diagonal X cuts.)
All those who have X should be able to run it.  Also I updated the rest
for the puzzle collection as well.
 
  It is available at ftp.x.org in /contrib/games/puzzles in separate
files.  It will also  be available at sunsite.unc.edu in
/pub/Linux/games/x11 as xpuzzle-4.10.tgz
Any problems with the compilation ... let me know.
It has been tested on Linux, SunOS, Solaris, HP-UX, and VMS.
 
  Here is the README file:
 
 
 
Updates:
  xpuzzles (4.10)
    Random number generator included.
    All puzzles have been put through Sun's cc and lint
    xdino added
    Bug fixed in xmlink. It moved correctly but was hard to turn.
    Bug fixed with control key of xpyraminx.  It turned the whole puzzle
      the wrong way.
    New control key moves for the 2D version of xskewb.
    More freedom in movement in xoct and xpyraminx using control+shift.
    (Later updates to individual puzzles will now be 4.10.1 etc.
     No more different minor version numbers for each puzzle.)
 
  xpuzzles (<4.10)
    Removed lint warnings and added a VMS make.com .
    Conservative guess for random number generator.
    A super Makefile to make all puzzles.
    Puzzles now have undo, save, and recall features.
    xmball and xmlink intitialization bug fixed.
    xmball and xmlink added, both need more efficient methods to draw a sector.
    xrubik only save and undo bug fixed.
      After a save, undo did not work.
      auto-solver - sincere thanks to Michael B. Martin
       <martinm@sps1.phys.vt.edu>
    Some older versions used Motif (3.x), XView (2.x), and SunView (1.x)
 
xrubik is currently the only one in this collection with a auto-solver.
 
The collection includes:
SLIDING BLOCK PUZZLES
xcubes:         expanded 15 puzzle
xtriangles:     same complexity as 15 puzzle
xhexagons:      2 modes: one ridiculously easy, one harder than 15 puzzle
 
ROTATIONAL 3D PUZZLES
  hold down control key to move whole puzzle
  letters that represent colors can be changed in mono-mode
 
xrubik:         a nxnxn Erno Rubik's Cube(tm) (or Magic Cube)
                auto-solves 2x2x2 and 3x3x3 (non-orient mode).
xpyraminx:      a nxnxn Uwe Meffert's Pyraminx(tm) (and Senior Pyraminx),
                a tetrahedron with Period 2, Period 3, and Combined cut modes
                and it also a sticky mode to simulate a Halpern's Tetrahedron
                or a Pyraminx Tetrahedron
xoct:           a nxnxn Uwe Meffert's Magic Octahedron (or Star Puzzler) and
                Trajber's Octahedron with Period 3, Period 4, and Combined
                cut modes and it also includes a sticky mode
xskewb:         a Meffert's Skewb (or Pyraminx Cube), a cube with diagonal
                cuts, each face is cut with a diamond shape
xdino:          a Dinosaur Rubik's Cube, a cube with different diagonal cuts,
                each face is cut with a "X"
xmball:         a variable cut Masterball(tm), variable number of latitudinal
                and longitudinal cuts on a sphere, where the longitudinal cuts
                permit only 180 degree turns.
 
COMBINATION ROTATIONAL AND SLIDING 3D PUZZLES
  hold down shift key to move whole puzzle
  letters that represent colors can be changed in mono-mode
xmlink:         a nxm Erno Rubik's Missing Link(tm)
 
Newbies (especially DOS users 8-) ):
  MS DOS/MS Windows & Mac users, sorry no port currently available.
  What you need:
    80386 or better, or Risc, etc.
    UNIX (or even VMS): Linux and FreeBSD are freely available.
    X: XFree86 is freely available on Linux and FreeBSD distributions.
    gunzip: freely available from GNU and the above distributions.
    tar: freely available from GNU and the above distributions.
  What you do:
    After transfering the PUZZLE file to your machine
      gunzip PUZZLE.tar.gz
      tar xvf PUZZLE.tar
        (tar xvzf PUZZLE.tar.gz may work as a short cut)
    Then read the README generated by the above command.
  Questions about the above or how to find out more about puzzles, no problem,
    my mail address is: bagleyd@source.asset.com

