From cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu  Wed Nov 12 21:40:03 1997
Return-Path: <cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu>
Received: from sun30.aic.nrl.navy.mil by mc.lcs.mit.edu (8.8.1/mc) with SMTP
	id VAA01451; Wed, 12 Nov 1997 21:40:03 -0500 (EST)
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu
Mail-from: From ck1@home.com Tue Nov 11 22:26:29 1997
From: "Chris and Kori Pelley" <ck1@home.com>
To: <CUBE-LOVERS@ai.mit.edu>
Subject: Colors and other variations between brands
Date: Tue, 11 Nov 1997 22:26:17 -0500
Message-Id: <01bcef1a$bcbe2f60$da460318@CC623255-A.srst1.fl.home.com>

Most of the early "clone" cubes had the Blue/Green arrangement instead of
the Blue/White.  Most Ideal cubes seemed to have the Blue/White.  There were
exceptions, though...

I remember there were several factories where Ideal had their cubes made.
Some factories were better than others in terms of their quality.  My
favorites were the ones that said "Made in Korea" on a little peel-off gold
sticker.  Back in those days I would refer to "my Korean cube."  Believe it
or not, these all had the Blue/Green arrangement but they were genuine Ideal
cubes!  Their cubes were also the smoothest.  I still have one of them that
is in near perfect condition.  It was the cube I used in the competitions.

The other factories included Japan and Hong Kong.  The Japanese cubes seemed
more prevalent and I still have at least three of those-- all featuring the
Blue/White arrangement.

The earliest Rubik's Cube I ever saw had strange colors-- grey instead of
white and the shades of green and blue were very different from later cubes.
I don't think it was an Ideal cube.

The Blue/White arrangement definitely won out as Ideal's "standard"
arrangement since their 4x4x4 Revenge and 2x2x2 Pocket Cubes featured the
identical coloring.  Some Ideal 3x3x3 cubes were Blue/White but
"non-standard" because the Yellow/Green would be reversed (mirror image).
Who knows why these variations existed-- probably something as simple as
some factory tech switching the sticker feeds accidentally?

The new "Rubik's Cubes" made by Oddz-On are not all that great, in my
opinion.  They look shiny and great in the box, but after mild use the
stickers get ruined.  The Square-1 puzzles suffer the same fate.  Also their
turning mechanism is nowhere near the quality of the "Korean cubes."  Their
2x2x2 "Mini-Cube" as it is now called also lacks in quality compared to the
old Ideal Pocket Cubes.  Still, it warms my heart to see them back in toy
stores again!

Much better are the "Magic Cube" clones that appeared last year.  I have
purchased several of these (only $3.99 at Walgreen's!) and they turn very
smoothly.  The holographic stickers are different, but they don't wear out
like the Oddz-On cubes.  Also, mine feature the Blue/White arrangement!

I recently saw a post that Ideal is now making cubes again.  This seems
strange since I thought they went out of business, but I could be wrong.
Anybody know the real scoop?

Finally, Square-1 seems to have made a reappearance.  I thought they only
made one batch of these, but maybe they've made another lately?

Chris Pelley
ck1@home.com
http://members.home.net/ck1




