From cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu  Fri Nov 14 11:46:24 1997
Return-Path: <cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu>
Received: from sun30.aic.nrl.navy.mil by mc.lcs.mit.edu (8.8.1/mc) with SMTP
	id LAA10792; Fri, 14 Nov 1997 11:46:23 -0500 (EST)
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu
Mail-from: From cube-lovers-request@life.ai.mit.edu Fri Nov 14 10:27:59 1997
Date: Fri, 14 Nov 1997 15:25:06 GMT
From: David Singmaster <david.singmaster@sbu.ac.uk>
To: tenie1@juno.com
Cc: cube-lovers@ai.mit.edu
Message-Id: <009BD499.F2FD74E5.202@ice.sbu.ac.uk>
Subject: RE: 6x6x6 cube design

	First, regarding the 6^3 and 7^3.  As noted, when you get to
these sizes, the connection of the corners while turning becomes
problematic.  For the 6^3, the overlap is about 15% of the edge length
of the cubie, probably too small to be practicable.  One can imagine
some clever mechanism to hold onto the corners, but it would be tricky
and I've never seen one clearly described.
	However, if you think about it, there's no reason for all the
levels of the cube to be the same size.  That it, the parallel cutting
planes of the entire cube do not have to be equally spaced.  One can
thus have the corner cubies be very large with much smaller centre
cubies.  The edge cubies will be cuboids, rather than cubes.  Using
this idea, one can make arbitrarily large cubes, but the interior
pieces become impossible to manipulate.

	Now let me try my hand at describing three versions of the 2^3.
	I'll start with the simplest which was sent to me from Japan
about 1980.  This had a steel sphere in the middle and each cubie had
a magnet in it.  Although the sphere and the cubies were carefully
machined, when one moved it quickly, a piece would catch against
another piece and lift off and then fall off.  Not very successful.
	The second version was patented by Ishige in Japan about 1977?
and several versions were made.  I received a batch of seven with
different colouring patterns made by a German sports firm - three or
four had broken just in the post!  This version has a central sphere
and six of what I call 'umbrellas' sticking out toward each face
centre.  Each of the pieces has a notch around the part that rest
against the inner sphere.  The umbrellas catch into these notches.
One can also think of the cubies as having their own umbrellas, but of
triangular form and concave.  This is the same mechanism used in the
Impossiball.
	The third version is the most common and is shown in Rubik's
Hungarian patent, but is hard to interpret as I've never had the text
translated.  Basically, his 2^3 is a 3^3 with the edge and centre
pieces concealed.  I gather from earlier messages that there were
several versions of this, but I only recall one, but I only ever took
a few apart.
	At the very centre was a cube.  On each face was a square rod
extending almost to the face center.  The ends of these had a +
groove.  Between the rods were pieces in the form of a quadrant with a
groove on the outer, curved, edge.  When all these pieces are in
place, each of the midplanes of the cube is seen to contain a circle
with a groove on its outer edge.  The corner pieces are basically
hollow, but each interior face is a layer ending in a quarter-circular
curve, which fits as a tongue into the groove just mentioned.  Where
two of these meet, at the interior edge of the piece, a section is cut
away to allow the piece to slide past the projections of the end of
the square rods.
 	In theory, one might be able to avoid the quadrant pieces, but
I think they give the structure stability.
	A more serious problem is that the inner, concealed, pieces
can get out of synch with the visible pieces, The early patent of
Gustafson left gaps so one could see the inner pieces and move them.
The method used by Rubik and in some similar puzzles is to fix one
corner piece to the inner structure by some method.  Rubik's 2^3 did
this by making some of the rod ends solid rather than grooved (or
perhaps they were fixed to the central cube so they couldn't rotate).
One could also not notch one of the corner pieces.  Whatever one does,
it must have the effect of preventing one corner from moving in
relation to the inner structure.  I seem to recall that the 4^3 uses
this idea also.
	Don't know how much this helps, but that's the best I can do
off-hand.

DAVID SINGMASTER,  Professor of Mathematics and Metagrobologist
School of Computing, Information Systems and Mathematics
Southbank University, London, SE1 0AA, UK.
Tel: 0171-815 7411;  fax: 0171-815 7499; 
email:  zingmast  or  David.Singmaster  @sbu.ac.uk

