From cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu  Sat Nov 15 23:21:58 1997
Return-Path: <cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu>
Received: from sun30.aic.nrl.navy.mil by mc.lcs.mit.edu (8.8.1/mc) with SMTP
	id XAA21060; Sat, 15 Nov 1997 23:21:57 -0500 (EST)
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu
Mail-from: From roger.broadie@iclweb.com Thu Nov 13 19:09:04 1997
From: roger.broadie@iclweb.com (Roger Broadie)
To: "Geoffroy Van Lerberghe" <Geoffroy.VanLerberghe@ping.be>,
        "Cube-Lovers" <Cube-Lovers@ai.mit.edu>
Subject: Re: Cubes in London, plus OddzOn, clones and colours
Date: Fri, 14 Nov 1997 00:07:33 -0000
Message-Id: <19971114000519.AAA4398@home>

London's most famous toy-shop is Hamley's in Regent St.  On the fourth
floor they have a wall of OddzOn cubes at 39.00 pounds each, together
with snakes and magics.

I say OddzOn because that is the name given in the copyright notice at the
back of the instruction booklet, although in this country that name appears
nowhere else. The packaging (a rectangular cardboard casing with a clear
central panel holding the cube at an angle) gives the distributors as
Toybrokers Ltd.  This cube sometimes appears in the British Toys 'R' Us,
and my family bought one in Jenners, the big Edinburgh department store,
this summer.  I  wouldn't rate it as highly as the Ideal cubes.

I had a quick look for clones in the sort of shop in London that I have
seen them in in the past, but found none.  I bought a couple of Taiwanese
clones in Dublin a few weeks ago - they came in a cube-sized cardboard box
with a picture of a cube on the front with two yellow centre pieces, five
green edge pieces and five red corner pieces.  I did not complain that the
cube inside did not match this picture.  I tried both the sample on display
and one of the cubes which I later bought.  They turned quite well.  I did
not try the other one until I got it home, when to my annoyance I found it
much stiffer.  The colours are rather dull, but yellow and white are
opposite, which I prefer, because then the colours of the opposite faces
seem to have a sensible connection helping recognition of a piece that is
in the opposite face to its home face. They cost 35.00 Irish pounds each .

Among various other puzzle, Hamleys also has those from Meffert, including
the skewb and an annoying dodecahedron - the colours are duplicated at
opposite poles.  So does Toys 'R' Us.  What I have not been able to find is
the 5x5x5 that is shown on the Meffert packaging.

The OddzOn cube is the one that is associated with the www.rubiks.com site,
which reproduces the instruction booklet and uses the same logo in chubby
capitals.  Rubik himself is clearly involved - he is quoted on the site.

I had concluded that Ideal Toys (the US company) had gone out of business,
having failed to find any reference to it currently.  There is a British
company Ideal Toys (UK) Limited, but that is a subsidiary of Triumph Adler
AG.  There was a company The Ideal Toy Company Limited,  but that was
dissolved, as was CBS Toys Limited, which may have been connected.

OddzOn Products Inc appears to be a subsidiary of Hasbro Inc.

I have a suspicion that Ideal may have deliberately adopted the
yellow-opposite-green configuration to create a new colour arrangement that
would help them expunge clones by relying on their trade dress.

Roger Broadie

