From:	mytv-film@t-online.de
To:	MX%"david.singmaster@sbu.ac.uk"
Subj:	rubik's cube
Date: Wed, 17 Feb 1999 17:49:19 +0100
To: david.singmaster@sbu.ac.uk
Subject: Rubik's cube

Hello Mr. Singmaster,

my name is Gvksen and I'm working for the new German TV show "Guinness -Show
of Records" on behalf of the German Broadcast Station ARD.

In one of our next shows we would like to present a person who is able to solve
a classical Rubik's Cube in a spectacular way. For example by studying the cube
first for a couple of minutes and then solving it without looking at it. On an
internet homepage with different links to Rubik's cube fans we've read that there
is a young man in U.K. called John White who is able to do that: Studying the
cube for 10 minutes and than solving it behind his back in 136 seconds. Now,
we're looking for this young man, who is or was a mathematics student at the
University of Warwick.

Our investigation up to now brought us to you, so you are considered to be one
of the leading "Rubik's cube experts" in the world. In addition you were a judge
during the "Rubik's Cube World Championship". So you may know a lot of persons
and beyond that a lot of different variations of solving a Rubik's cube in an
impressive way.

We would be very happy if you could give us a hint or some advice concerning our
idea of presenting this category of record in our show.

One characteristic feature of our show is the fact that we present a record as a
competition. That means: We would invite the record holder and a challenger who
believes himself capable of being able to solve a cube in a similar way. In the
best case this challenger should be a person who speaks German. Do you know
anyone who could be suitable?

I hope that these are not too much questions and I would like to thank you even
now for your help and kind co-operation.

Our e-mail address: mytv-film@t-online.de

kind Regards

Gvksen
MyTV Film and Tv Production

DAVID SINGMASTER,  Professor of Mathematics and Metagrobologist
School of Computing, Information Systems and Mathematics
Southbank University, London, SE1 0AA, UK.
Tel: 0171-815 7411;  fax: 0171-815 7499;
email:  zingmast  or  David.Singmaster  @sbu.ac.uk

