From cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu  Fri Mar 12 18:39:11 1999
Return-Path: <cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu>
Received: from sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil (sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil [132.250.84.38])
	by mc.lcs.mit.edu (8.9.1a/8.9.1-mod) with SMTP id SAA19304
	for <cube-lovers-outbound@mc.lcs.mit.edu>; Fri, 12 Mar 1999 18:39:10 -0500 (EST)
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu
From: WaVeReBeL@webtv.net
Date: Thu, 11 Mar 1999 10:34:35 -0800 (PST)
To: Cube-Lovers@ai.mit.edu
Subject: Re:  Speed cube times
Message-Id: <21178-36E80CBB-632@mailtod-121.bryant.webtv.net>

My records:

LAYER BY LAYER - 33 sec.

I can get it under a minute almost every time.  My average is about 55
sec.

I use a very eclectic approach in order to get as few moves as possible.
I'll start off w/ Jiri's or Lars Petrus' method for the top, depending
on which might get fewer moves.  For the bottom, I use a whole bunch of
different methods that I have learned on the web to finish it w/ as few
series as possible.  Usually it takes 3 series of moves to finish off
the last layer.  Often only 2 series, at the most 4.  I average about 65
turns.

My hands aren't super fast, so I try to make up for it by looking ahead
and limiting the number of moves.  If I take the time to practice the
hand movements and fingering, I think I can increase my time
dramatically.  My goal is to get it down to average under 30 seconds
(yeah right). =)


CORNERS FIRST - 47 sec.

My average is about 1 min.  I basically use Matthew Monroe's method w/ a
few tricks of my own.  I just wish there is more info on this method on
the web.  The fingering is much easier and faster to do than the layer
method, but it takes me longer because I have to use so many more turns.
I'm guessing there is lots of info I don't know about in the books that
have been written on this method, but I don't know how to get my hands
on 'em.  Could somebody point me to a web page or a book store that
could help?  I'm looking for more series of moves on this method.


ONE HANDED! - 1 min 12 sec.

I have been so addicted to cubing recently that I would spend hours at a
time.  So much so that my arms and hands would get tierd, and I would
sometimes get pains in my wrists & forearms.  (But as an addict I still
keep on going)  One day my right hand gave up, so I thought...what the
hell, why not try w/ my left by itself!  At first it took me about 5
min, then I got it down to 3 min.  After a little bit more practice, I
now average about 1 min, 45 sec!  Again, I'm not super fast, I just look
ahead and use as few moves as possible.  On the web I saw that the
record for one hand is 53 seconds.  I'm hoping to beat that someday.
Does anybody else on this list specialize one handed?  Got any good one
handed records?


MY FEET!!! - 7 min 19 sec.

I didn't think I could do it, but after my success w/ one hand, I had to
try it.  I also remember seeing somebody do it on that's incredible.

At first it took me about 20-30 minutes...I didn't bother timing myself,
because I didn't think I could do it.  The hardest part is doing long
sequences of moves in the last layer.  I've messed up a lot at that
point.  Sometime later I tried it again, and did it in 10 min, then
finally my record.  I would practice this a lot more, but my legs get
tierd lifting and manipulating the cube after just a couple of tries.
With some practice, I could probably get it down to 5 minutes.

-----

This brings me to a couple of ideas for a spectacular feat. (No pun
intended)  How about solving two cubes at once...one in eace
hand...solving w/ feet and hands at the same time?

-----

I have to say I'm pretty proud of these accomplishments.  I'm new to
this.  4 months ago I couldn't even solve a cube.  I just barely learned
how in November.  Now I'm addicted.  I wore out the stickers on two
brand new cubes in my first 3 weeks. (A problem which is currently being
addressed on this mailing list)  It has gotten so bad that It's
interfered w/ my school work.  (As I'm writing this, I should be
studying for my Trig exam)

-Alex Montilla-

