From cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu  Tue Mar 16 15:39:51 1999
Return-Path: <cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu>
Received: from sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil (sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil [132.250.84.38])
	by mc.lcs.mit.edu (8.9.1a/8.9.1-mod) with SMTP id PAA02419
	for <cube-lovers-outbound@mc.lcs.mit.edu>; Tue, 16 Mar 1999 15:39:50 -0500 (EST)
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu
Message-Id: <36EB0B28.1169@ameritech.net>
Date: Sat, 13 Mar 1999 19:04:40 -0600
From: Hana Bizek <hbizek@ameritech.net>
Reply-To: hbizek@ameritech.net
To: cube-lovers@ai.mit.edu
Subject: parity pairs
References: <36E7D3A7.1796@ameritech.net>

> [Moderator's note: By parity pairs, I rather suspect he means mirror-image
> pairs.]

Let me tell you what I mean by parity pairs, why very few have probably
heard about this concept and why they are crucial in 3-dimensional (3-d)
cube art.

Suppose one has two cubes of identical color scheme such that the color
on both cubes' up, down, front and back faces are exactly the same. If
the color of the left face of one cube is identical to the color of the
right face of the other cube, such a pair of cubes is said to form a
parity pair. The color scheme is still identical, but the ORIENTATION of
the faces is reversed for one of the members of the pair. One cannot
obtain parity pairs by conventional cube manipulations, but must obtain
them either from the manufacturer, or switch the faces themselves
manually. I would prefer to buy such pairs from the toymaker, for it
pains me to tamper illegally with  those stickers. I have devised a
simple algorithm to do it as painlessly as possible, but it still is a
pain. But will a manufacturer sell me parity pairs?

The reason so few people know about parity pairs is that such pairs are
moot in solution algorithms. You do not need to concern yourself at all
with parity pairs, you just have one cube and painlessly solve it. Ditto
for 2-dimensional (2-d) designs (unless you treat them as lxmx1)
designs. However, they are essential in 3-d cube art. They are
responsible for reflection-equivalent designs, designs of fewer than six
colors and ultimately fractal design prototypes. They also determine
special symmetries in a 3-d design. They are the cornerstone of 3-d
design theory. Without their presence all of the 3-d designs I have
constructed would not be possible.

Why all this  self-serving fuss about parity pairs and 3-d designs? The
point is this: given four parity pairs, one can construct a 2x2x2 larger
clean design, that has three colors only on its six faces. The internal
faces that touch are colored the same. Those colors are hidden inside
the design or suppressed. Such an array of cubes, when used as corners,
produce, e.g., reflection-equivalence in a design. Go to your cube
collection, extract four parity pairs and see for yourselves.

So I think you got the idea, Mr. Moderator. Just one slight correction;
I am a "she," not a "he." You will find this almost incredible, but
women too, love the cube.

Hana Bizek
(female) physicist and
3-d Rubik's cube designer

[Moderator's note: On the contrary, there are several women on
 cube-lovers, and Dame Kathleen Ollerenshaw is well-known as one of
 the earliest writers about Rubik's cube and one of the first victims
 of Cubist's Thumb.  I just didn't know that "Hana" was a woman's
 name, and I had forgotten that this information was presumed by a
 mention of you in the archives.  I apologize for the oversight.

 As for nomenclature, the reason no one knows about "parity pairs" is
 that the term is ambiguous--"parity" could refer to representatives
 of any even division of a set into two parts.  If you wish to enable
 people to know what you mean without going through your somewhat
 confusing description, then you should use the term "enantiomorphic
 pairs", "chiral pairs", or "mirror-image pairs".  I believe these are
 the standard terms used by chemists, physicists, and everyone else,
 respectively.

 There is an interesting question, though, which your hobby may give
 you a particular ability to answer.  According to _Rubik's Cubic
 Compendium_, the most common color scheme has red opposite orange,
 blue opposite green, and white opposite yellow.  This permits two
 mirror-image color schemes, distinguished by whether red, white, and
 blue go clockwise or anticlockwise around a corner.  The question is
 whether there is a tendency for one of these schemes to predominate,
 and if so, which and by how much?  For instance, one enantiomorph
 predominates extremely strongly in the manufacture of dice, though I
 don't know why. --Dan ]

