From cube-lovers-errors@oolong.camellia.org  Mon Jul  7 02:22:55 1997
Return-Path: cube-lovers-errors@oolong.camellia.org
Received: from oolong.camellia.org (localhost [127.0.0.1]) by oolong.camellia.org (8.6.12/8.6.12) with SMTP id CAA04972; Mon, 7 Jul 1997 02:22:54 -0400
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@oolong.camellia.org
Message-Id: <199707070459.AAA17039@life.ai.mit.edu>
Date: Mon, 7 Jul 1997 01:04:35 -0400
From: michael reid <reid@math.brown.edu>
To: cube-lovers@ai.mit.edu
Subject: symmetry reductions for superflip

a simple counting argument shows that some cube positions are at least
18 face turns from start, and thus the diameter of the cube group is
at least 18f.  in january 1995, i showed, by exhaustive search,
that the position "superflip" is exactly 20 face turns from start.
therefore the diameter is at least 20f.  this gave the first
improvement to the lower bound obtained by the counting argument.

the searching method i used at the time was my version of kociemba's
algorithm.  although my symmetry reductions fit together quite well
with kociemba's algorithm, this might not be the most appropriate
searching method to use for this purpose.  (i guess i could have
hacked it not to bother looking for solutions longer than 19f.
i don't remember why i didn't do this.)

my new optimal solving program can do an exhaustive search in much
less time.  the symmetry reductions are similar, but much simpler.
i will try be more coherent this time with my explanation, hopefully
without being overbearing.

the first thing to note is that dik winter found a maneuver for
superflip in 20f:

  F B U2 R F2 R2 B2 U' D F U2 R' L' U B2 D R2 U B2 U   (20f)

therefore our concern is with searching for maneuvers of length
at most 19f.

there are three ways to transform a maneuver for superflip to get
another such maneuver, which do not change its length:

1. we may conjugate the maneuver by any symmetry of the cube.
2. we may cyclically shift the maneuver; i.e. replace

      sequence_1 sequence_2     by     sequence_2 sequence_1

3. we may replace the maneuver by its inverse.

(in fact, we won't use 3 here, but it might be helpful elsewhere.)
our first result is

proposition 1.  any maneuver for superflip in 19f contains a 180 degree
                face turn.
proof.  if the proposition were false, then superflip would be an
        odd number of quarter turns from start, contradiction.  qed.

the relevance of this proposition is

proposition 2.  suppose that a maneuver for superflip contains a 180 degree
                face turn.  then it can be transformed, using the above
                tranformations, into a maneuver that begins with  U R2.
proof.  we first claim that the maneuver has two consecutive "syllables"
        such that the first contains a 90 degree face turn and the second
        contains a 180 degree face turn.  a "syllable" is a sequence of
        one or two face turns along the same axis; e.g. U D2.  by
        hypothesis, the maneuver has a syllable that contains a half turn.
        if the claim is false, then the preceding syllable contains no
        90 degree turns, and therefore consists only of half turns.  but
        then the syllable before that contains only half turns, by the
        same reasoning.  continuing in this way, we see that every syllable
        consists only of half turns.  therefore we have a maneuver for
        superflip consisting only of half turns.  this is a contradiction,
        so the claim is true.
             now, since the individual face turns within a syllable
        commute, we may suppose that the maneuver has a 90 degree face
        turn followed by a 180 degree face turn, which are along
        different axes, and thus are adjacent faces.  now we may
        conjugate by an appropriate symmetry of the cube to suppose that
        these turns are  U R2.  finally, we may cyclically shift the
        maneuver so that these are the first two turns.  qed.

proposition 3.  suppose that superflip is exactly 19 face turns from
                start.  then applying the sequence  U R2  to it brings
                us 2 face turns closer to start, i.e. 17f  from start.
proof.  apply proposition 1 and proposition 2.  qed.

we now know how to handle the case that superflip's distance from start
is exactly 19f.  if the distance is less than 19f, we use the following

proposition 4.  under any circumstances, applying the sequence  U R2
                to superflip brings us at least  1f  closer to start.
proof.  a minimal maneuver for superflip must contain a 90 degree twist,
        and we may suppose that the next face turned is an adjacent one.
        by cyclically shifting the maneuver, we may bring these two
        turns to the beginning.  furthermore, by symmetry, we may
        suppose that the first turn is  U  and the second is some twist
        of the  R  face.  now by applying  U  to superflip, we've moved
        1f  closer to start, and applying  R2  to this doesn't move us
        any further from start, since it either combines with, or cancels
        the next turn in the minimal maneuver.  qed.

putting this all together, we get our desired result.

proposition 5.  suppose that superflip is within 19f of start.  then the
                position  superflip U R2  is within 17f of start.
proof.  this is just combining props 3 and 4.  qed.

i don't claim that these are the best reductions possible.  they
suffice for our purposes.

i tested the position  superflip U R2  (i.e. the position obtained by
first doing superflip, and then doing the sequence  U R2) with my
optimal solver.  my program took 2 hours and 40 minutes to exhaustively
search this position through 17 face turns (not including about 11
minutes to generate all the lookup tables).  there were no solutions.
thus superflip is exactly 20 face turns from start.  when i did the
search in january 1995, the run time was 6 days.  so we see quite a bit
of improvement.

mike


