From cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu  Wed Sep  9 13:47:36 1998
Return-Path: <cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu>
Received: from sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil by mc.lcs.mit.edu (8.8.8/mc) with SMTP
	id NAA29037; Wed, 9 Sep 1998 13:47:35 -0400 (EDT)
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu
Mail-from: From cube-lovers-request@life.ai.mit.edu Sun Sep  6 23:27:56 1998
Message-Id: <35F350B1.626F@ameritech.net>
Date: Sun, 06 Sep 1998 22:19:13 -0500
From: Hana Bizek <hbizek@ameritech.net>
Reply-To: hbizek@ameritech.net
To: cube-lovers@ai.mit.edu
Subject: Rubik's cube kingdom

Hello, cube-lovers,

the following miniessay talks about that realm of human knowledge, where
the rubik's cube reigns supreme. The gates of this kingdom are open to
anybody, but only those who love the cube, venture beyond its gates. The
rest of humanity are either unaware of it, or ignore its existence.
Those folks are truly missing a lot. After finishing {if indeed you
choose to finish} this epistle, you may want to do several things:

  a} emit a few chuckles thinking what an insane idea this is

  b} pause to think about the contents, debating whether all this is
     worth your precious time

  c} email your ideas, commenrts, etc, to me at hbizek@ameritech.net

Thank you. 

                WELCOME TO THE RUBIK'S CUBE KINGDOM.

This is not a kingdom of people, it is a kingdom of ideas. Its king is
the Rubik's cube. We pay homage to our king by trying to learn more
about him and see if this knowledge could be extended to other areas of
human pursuit. I am now going to tell you what I think those areas are
and point to a couple of web sites where results may be found. This is
by no means a finite list. As new ideas occur to all of us, they should
be added to the kingdom.  The Rubik's cube kingdom is there for anyone
to benefit from, just as any other field. Please feel welcome to sample
and browse.

Initially, of course, one should master the Rubik's cube solution. The
ability to solve one side should be the absolute minimum. It is far
better and morre satisfying to be able to solve the cube completely,
that is, get all six sides a solid color. I have seen numerous solution
algorithms on the web. Someone might consider collecting those varied
algorithms in a handy volume for cube lovers and others to use. I have
seen some solutions on the web, in which you are presented with a
solved cube in a little square field. You are instructed to press 's'
to scramble the cube and 'r' to restore {i. e. solve} it. That is not
solving the cube! You have to understand the steps of the solution
algorithm.

The areas where the cube has any impact are art, mathematics and
science. Let me look at art first. Quite recently there was a small item
in TIME magazine stating  that the cube has entered Hollywood and is
the subject of some movies. I heard that there are also songs about the
cube. By the above definition those human expressions too belong in the
Rubik's cube kingdom. However, I am going to zero on two aspects:
pictures and sculptures.

At http://www.wunderland.com/WTS/Jake/CubeArt one may see creations by
the people at Wunderland company {the spelling is correct} that depict
mostly 2-dimensional picture-like creations from a set of many Rubik's
cubes. They just show the pictures, thwy do not  describe their method
in any book, as far as I can determine {of course, I can be wrong}. But
from my  observation it seems to me they need to be worried about
continuity from one side of the cube to the one side of the next cube,
which is not too complicated. 

The sculptures are 3-dimensional structures and require some symmetry
on all the  faces of the cube, simultaneously. In this case, the
complete solution of the cube is a must. The required algorithm is
described in the book, "Mathematics of the Rubik's cube design," written
by me and published last year. As far as I know, I am the author of
these designs, described in my previous postings to the cube lovers. I
have stated a web site where three of these designs may be seen. I
repeat it here for completeness:
http://www.ssie.binghamton.edu/~jirif/hana1.html

Next, I am going to talk about science. I have to warn you: those
ideas are, as far as I know, unknown and undeveloped, as is, indeed,
the design Problem itself. First on the agenda is fractals and fractal
design prototypes. Some of the designs in my book, such as the Menger
sponge, are such fractals. One can think of the Rubik's cube as a
three dimensionl version of a Cantor set, which is a {one dimensional}
line.  Actually these fractals are neither three nor one dimensional;
they have fractional dimensions. But the 0th iteration are. One can
formulate rules for geometrical fractal iteration. Remember that
iteration preserves fractal dimension.  By the same token, for integer
dimension, it really doesn't matter if you subdivide by m or 10000n;
the dimension is always the same. Between the integer dimension there
are fractals of fractional dimension. These fractals can be reached by
breaking up of integer dimension or by some other
manipulation. Fractal design made from cubes suggest one such
manipulation, as witnessed by box fractal. But this is supposed to be
a miniessay, nor a book.

Another idea consists of computerizing the design algorithm, in some
comprehensive way so that the Rubik's cubes are used as 3-dimensional
cellular automata. It would be deliciously complicated game, perhaps
employing some of the patterns in the design theory.

Finally there is the question of what happens if internal combined faces
of a design that touch are colored the same? I will let you figure that
one out. It is not too hard. Personally, I had much more difficulty to
properly formulate the question than to provide the answer.

Finally, there is math. In this respect the ideas were formulated
partially by mathematicians in the 1980s during the heyday of the cube,
partially by cube lovers today. I would like to include my book in this
category.  At least its title indicates that there is some math, if that
has to be the only reason. And, as every cube lover knows, all possible
elements of a Rubik's cube form a mathematical group. A visitor to the
Rubik's cube kingdom will surely encounter some joys of group theory on
his travels.

Any objections, criticism, etc are welcome. Free speach prevails in the
Rubik's cube kingdom. Suppress free speach and not much is left.  

Hana

[ Moderator's note: I am somewhat concerned at the low
  information-to-woowoo ratio of Hana's "miniessay", but I think
  there are enough real ideas there that I've passed it on to the
  list.  I must, however, note that while "free speach" may prevail on
  the Internet, the contents of the cube-lovers mailing list is
  subject to editing for topicality, format, sensibility, and content.
  Which is to say that if the silliness level gets too high, you may
  have to find somewhere else to make your "kingdom".  I encourage
  guidance from the readership on where to draw the line; send your
  opinions to cube-lovers-request@ai.mit.edu. --Dan ]

