From cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu  Sat Jan 22 15:35:46 2000
Return-Path: <cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu>
Received: from sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil (sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil [132.250.84.38])
	by mc.lcs.mit.edu (8.9.1a/8.9.1-mod) with SMTP id PAA02733
	for <cube-lovers-outbound@mc.lcs.mit.edu>; Sat, 22 Jan 2000 15:35:46 -0500 (EST)
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu
Message-Id: <387C51CD.706ED535@ibm.net>
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 2000 02:05:01 -0800
From: "Jin 'Time Traveler' Kim" <chrono@ibm.net>
To: Cube-Lovers@ai.mit.edu
Subject: Rubik's Revenge by Oddzon
References: <000701bf442c$151f8420$ea023dd4@wschwi>

Oddzon recently decided to manufacture a limited run of Rubik's
Revenges.  My understanding is that they originally made 250 for sale
but the cubes were so popular that they made another 250.  All 500
initial cubes are gone.

Here's the URL to the Rubik's page about the status of the Revenge:  It
will return to production.

http://www.rubiks.com/revenge.html

I recently picked up a couple of these prototype Revenges to compare
them to the original Ideal runs of the early 80's.  As far as I can
tell, Ideal had two different sets of Revenges made.  The first set is
from Macau.  Its mechanism is initially quite stiff and squeaks a lot
when turned.  This can eventually loosen up to a pretty smooth turning
mechanism.  It's made of stiff plastic which leads me to believe that
this would be the one more easily broken due to the potential
brittleness of the pieces.  The other Revenge is manufactured in Korea. 
This particular cube is made from a softer plastic and turns much more
smoothly than the Macau cube when brand new.  The drawback of the Korea
cube IMHO is that the cubelets are hollow.  Although both sets of cubes
seem to be injection molded, the Korean cube has "cheaped out" and left
the cubes hollow, which in my experience causes quite a bit of binding
in teh cube unless the planes of rotation are perfectly aligned. 
Neither puzzle is what I would consider a pleasure to work with.

Enter the Oddzon Cube.  It didn't come in a fancy box at all; just in a
simple plastic baggie and taped shut.  While the turning itself is a bit
rough feeling, the puzzle doesn't seem to bind at all and very little
pressure is required.  The plastic seems to be similar to the Korean
cube's softness but the cubelets are not hollow, which means no binding
and very forgiving about not having perfect alignment.  Unfortunately it
appears that the puzzle currently suffers from Oddzon's really cheap
laminated paper stickers.  According to their web site this puzzle is
only a prototype, so maybe they will improve the mechanism as well as
stick to using purely plastic stickers in their final production cubes. 
This will be THE Revenge I play with, not just because it will be in
production, but because it is by far the best feeling.  

If anybody doubts my claim to the puzzle's smoothness, I will gladly
send them one of my Oddzon Revenges.  I am willing to part with two of
them just so you can get a feel for the mechanism.  I will choose two
people to receive the cubes (chosen at my discretion) for an
evaluation.  If you don't think the puzzle is smooth, just mail it back
to me and I'll cover the postage.  However if you find the cube as good
as I do, be so kind as to mail me the cost of the cube and postage
(about 24 bucks).  

Please don't take this as an advertisement, but rather an endorsement
from someone who has found the ultimately Revenge cube to date.  

-- 
Jin "Time Traveler" Kim
chrono@ibm.net
http://www.chrono.org
'91/'95 PGT - SCPOC

