From cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu  Thu Jan 27 18:52:18 2000
Return-Path: <cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu>
Received: from sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil (sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil [132.250.84.38])
	by mc.lcs.mit.edu (8.9.1a/8.9.1-mod) with SMTP id SAA24358
	for <cube-lovers-outbound@mc.lcs.mit.edu>; Thu, 27 Jan 2000 18:52:18 -0500 (EST)
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu
Message-Id: <388AB533.798B2C6@health.on.net>
Date: Sun, 23 Jan 2000 18:30:51 +1030
From: Ghan <ghan@health.on.net>
Reply-To: ghan@health.on.net
To: Cube-Lovers <Cube-Lovers@ai.mit.edu>
Subject: Stuff...

Hi everyone!

This is my first post to Cube-Lovers! I don't really know whether most
people on this mailing list are regulars or just a bunch of strangers
who don't know each other, but I'll introduce myself anyway. I am:
Justin Ghan, recently turned 18 year old, about to start his second
year of Engineering/Science at Adelaide University, South Australia. I
wasn't really interested in all this cube stuff until the middle of
last year ... Well, when I was really young, my cousin had a pyraminx
and I solved that. But yeah, last July, I got one of my friends to
teach me how to solve the Rubik's Cube, which I have ever since
regretted, since I really would have liked to solve it myself...

Since then, I've bought a Megaminx from Meffert's and also won a
Professor Cube (thanks to the Puzzle Challenge!). I solved both of
them mostly using altered Rubik's Cube sequences, which sort of
dampened my satisfaction because I knew I didn't REALLY fully solve
them myself. I borrowed a friend's Creative Puzzle Ball (I'm not sure
what it's officially called) and managed to be able to solve it in a
trial-and-error sort of way.  I also bought a Bandaged Cube recently,
which arrived only yesterday and is annoying the hell out of me - I've
only solved it once by accident so far. And I wasn't paying attention
so I don't know how I did it. I've also got a Square-One and a Skewb
Diamond coming in the mail. I can't wait!

I was a bit intimidated when I read through the past couple of years
worth of Cube-Lovers mail because I always thought I was pretty smart
at maths (I went to the International Mathematical Olympiad twice) and
was also pretty proud of my puzzling skills but I couldn't make head
nor tail of most of the mathematical discussion! I've been trying to
learn some group theory since, so I hope one day I'll be able to join
in.

Anyway, I have quite a few unrelated questions I need help with...

First of all, the glue on my Megaminx is failing, meaning that every
time I turn a face I have to pause to readjust all the stickers which
have slid out of place. This is obviously very annoying. Any ideas on
what to do? What type of glue could I use to secure all the stickers
more permanently? By the way, I really like the grooved tiles on the
Bandaged Cube (and all the new Meffert's Puzzles, I think), although
the colours aren't as bright.

Now for the Professor Cube ... I've seen various solutions on the
internet but so far I haven't found anybody else who uses the boring
layer by layer approach. Does anybody else do it my way? It's probably
a really slow, inefficient method but it seemed the most obvious to me
when I started, since that's how I solved the Rubik's Cube and the
Megaminx. The reason I ask is that I would really like a fix for the
parity problem when I get to the last layer. When I end up with two
edge pieces swapped, I have to stuff up the last two layers
completely, which takes ages to redo.

I've been considering buying an Assembly Cube since, believe it or
not, I don't actually have a Rubik's Cube (although I can use the
Professor Cube as one). But I don't really know much about them.
What's going on with the 3-colour Assembly Cube at Meffert's? Also, if
I buy a Assembly Siamese Cube, can I use it to assemble a normal
Rubik's Cube? And what's the Alexander's Star? And I thought I saw a
"Star of David" (or something) mentioned on the Meffert's website...

Finally, I decided today to try my hand at some programming. Now, I
haven't had any programming experience except for extremely basic
BASIC, years and years ago on my Commodore 64. But I wanted to see if
I could write a program to solve the Bandaged Cube, so I tried to
learn some QBASIC. I thought it would be easier to solve a 2x2x2 cube
first, so I finally managed to write a working program to do that. It
was just a brute force search, first testing all 1 move algorithms,
then 2 move algorithms, etc.

I thought I was pretty good until I discovered that my program took 18
minutes to check all the 9 move algorithms! (I have a Pentium II 266,
although not being very computer smart I'm not sure how much
difference this makes.) I found out that more than half the
configurations required 9 moves or more. Well, this was pretty
embarrassing, considering that there are computer programs which can
solve the 3x3x3 in seconds (or so I've read, I haven't tried any of
these programs). So I'm wondering how to write a fast solver. Is my
program slow because of my bad programming skills, or is my method
just plain slow? I can't think of any other methods to find the
solution.

I hope some of you can help with my problems. I also realise that some
of my questions may have been answered in past discussions, but I
wasn't willing to read through 20 years of archives to find out! If
you can direct me to a previous relevant discussion, that would also
be appreciated.

Thanks!

Justin

