From cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu  Thu Apr 22 11:18:36 1999
Return-Path: <cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu>
Received: from sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil (sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil [132.250.84.38])
	by mc.lcs.mit.edu (8.9.1a/8.9.1-mod) with SMTP id LAA14447
	for <cube-lovers-outbound@mc.lcs.mit.edu>; Thu, 22 Apr 1999 11:18:36 -0400 (EDT)
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu
From: WaVeReBeL@webtv.net
Date: Mon, 19 Apr 1999 16:30:06 -0700 (PDT)
To: Cube-Lovers@ai.mit.edu
Cc: loewens@okanagan.net
Subject: Re: Rubiks Cube, Megaminx and Square-1
Message-Id: <8843-371BBC7E-10617@postoffice-123.bryant.webtv.net>
In-Reply-To: karen loewen <loewens@okanagan.net>'s message of Sat, 17 Apr
	1999 00:07:29 -0800

Hi,

I think it's great that you learned to do the cube all by yourself.  I
give much respect to anyone who solved any of these twisty puzzles.
Very few people have the ability and the time to figure them out.  I'm
curious if you are willing to share your methods?

I personally learned from a book.  Afterwards, I kind of wished I
hadn't.  Since then, I promised myself not to look at any more solutions
for any new puzzles I encounter.  So far, all I've managed to solve  on
my own is the pyraminx. (very easy compared to the cube)

I can see how you might feel a little disgruntled about others achieving
quick solving times with aid from outside resources.  I am an example of
that.  In about 4 months I achieved a 36 second average after scouring
the net for every bit of information I could find.  You shouldn't think
it makes you look bad.  If anything, I feel bad knowing that people like
you must put a lot of hard work into it, while I had a much easier time.
It still takes a lot of hard physical and mental work on my part to
achieve a fast average, but a lot of the mental work was already done
for me.

As far as cheating is concerned, in my and many others' defense, I must
respond, as the majority of people in this group have referred to
outside information at one point or another.  Consider speed cubing as a
sport just like any other in the Olympics.  Everyone is going to use
every resource available to win.  No one in the Olympics is going to try
and win (or succeed for that matter) all by themselves w/out any help or
coaching at all.  The use of outside help brings those who use it to a
higher level playing field.  These people are in an equal playing field
among themselves having access to the same resources.  If people choose
to learn on their own, it is only fair to put them in a different group
rather than lumping everyone in the same group.  But just because people
have accessed other resources, doesn't mean they will all of a sudden
reach less than a minute averages, it still takes a lot of hard work to
get there.  I know your average is still better than a lot of people who
got help.

On the other hand, getting help on learning how to solve the cube might
be considered cheating just as it would be when one gets hints to a
riddle or looks in the back of the book for all the answers.

I don't think there is anything wrong with help at all, unless your goal
is to do it all on your own without any help.  You said that you don't
believe that you will ever get much faster.  If your skill level
plateaus, I don't see anything wrong with using any resources available
to exceed your limits.  That's what help is for!  You can still be proud
of your accomplishments, but everyone has their limits.  There are very
few people who have achieved what you have.


-Alex Montilla-

