Date:  2 Apr 1981 1723-PST
From: Hopper at OFFICE  
Subject: Re: B E W A R E !!
To:   gary at RAND-AI, cube-lovers at MIT-MC
cc:   hopper at OFFICE

I've bought cubes recently as follows:

1-FEB (approx) , Ideal's with "Rubik's CUBE tm" on the center white cubie.  
Pakaged in cardboard and cellophane.  Hollow edge and corner cubies.  Squeekie,
but fine after lube with graphite.  No problems with facies.  Good size 
tolerances--very smooth operation after lube.

20-FEB (approx) , bought 3  that looked identical to the pevious one, except 
they were packaged in cylindrical plastic packages.  

   Two of the three turned out the same as the one purchased 1-FEB, except that
   size tolerences were very poor and operation was very rough, even after 
   lubrication.  No problems with the faces.

   The third cube was packaged the same and has the same "Rubik's CUBE tm" on 
   the center white cubie, but is quite different.  Although the cubies are 
   hollow, it is heavier then the others.  The plastic isn't so squeeky and 
   seems more like earlier cubes from last year.  The edge cubies have casting 
   ridges visible through the middle of the faces like the early, early cube I 
   got before last summer.  The shoulders on the edge cubies were flat so the 
   action was very rough.  The corner cubies were loose.  Filing down the 
   inside surfaces of the edge cubies cured the loose corners, and rounding 
   their shoulders made the action quite acceptable.  LASTLY, ONE (just ONE!) 
   of the red facies is inferior, darker in color, and crinkling!

20-MARCH (approx) , bought a cube with no acknowledged manufacturer, with 
cylindrical plastic pakage very similar to Ideal's, labeled "Made in Taiwan".  
Cubies are hollow very much like the third one from the 20-FEB batch, but the 
corner cubies have covers glued in the openings of the inside surfaces.  The 
quality of the facies seems good, but it may be too soon to tell.  The orange 
facies are not brilliant like Ideal's--more of a peach color.  The size 
tolerances seem quite good compared to Ideal's recent cubes.  Biggest drawback 
(and possible overriding factor) is the plastic seems much softer than Ideals's
and lubrication (at least with graphite--I haven't tried other recommended 
lubes such as silica gel) doesn't seem to make it any easier to turn.  It 
remains quite stiff. Also, some of the centers were screwed in much to tightly.

I'd be interested to hear any other experiences with recently-bought cubes.  
I'm curious about their availability in the Bay area and elsewhere.  --Dave--

-------
