From modestr@federal.unisys.com  Mon Apr  8 12:03:25 1996
Received: from www.han.federal.unisys.com by life.ai.mit.edu (4.1/AI-4.10) for /com/archive/cube-lovers id AA08118; Mon, 8 Apr 96 12:03:25 EDT
Received: from homer.MCLN.Federal.Unisys.COM by www.han.federal.unisys.com (8.6.12/mls/8.0) 
	id MAA17345; Mon, 8 Apr 1996 12:03:19 -0400
Return-Path: <modestr@federal.unisys.com>
Received: from h3-90.MCLN.Federal.Unisys.COM by homer.MCLN.Federal.Unisys.COM (8.6.12/mls/4.1) 
	id MAA27608; Mon, 8 Apr 1996 12:06:35 -0400
Message-Id: <199604081606.MAA27608@homer.MCLN.Federal.Unisys.COM>
Date: Mon, 08 Apr 96 12:03:28 -0700
From: Ron Modest <modestr@federal.unisys.com>
X-Mailer: Mozilla 1.22 (Windows; I; 16bit)
Mime-Version: 1.0
To: Cube-Lovers@ai.mit.edu
Subject: square 1 help
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=iso-8859-1

Regarding swapping two edges on Square-1.

You prompt me to write about something I have been meaning to get around 
to for a long time.

Long ago I found a way to swap two edges using a complicated sequence.  
After considerable unsuccessful effort to improve the solution, I bought 
Richard Snyders amazing book "Turn to 1" from Puzzletts.
( HTTP://WWW.PUZZLETTS.COM/ )  His solution is essentially the same as 
mine.  His method of documentation obscures what is really going on and 
consequently it would be very hard to memorize.  The principal is 
straight forward and follows these steps.

Move all the edge pieces to the same side in an orderly sequence.
Turn the side that has all corner pieces, one position.
Retrace all the moves that brought the edge pieces to the same side.
Fix any thing that got messed up in the process. (this is what I call 
collateral damage)

Snyder's solution optimizes the process to minimize the collateral damage 
but any variation on the steps listed above will work.


On a related subject....
How to get the puzzle into the shape of a cube after initial scrambling.
Snyders book shows pictures of all possible scrambled shapes.  Each has 
instructions for making a few turns and the next diagram to refer to.  
This process may be optimal for getting it into a cube shape but it is 
nearly impossible to memorize.

I am sure everyone who works with the puzzle learns some shapes that are 
close to the cube shape but it may seem nearly impossible to generally 
solve in any orderly way.  Well consider the following strategy:

Collect all the edge pieces on the same side.  They can all be side by 
side in what Snyder calls the Hoofprint pattern or in the Moon pattern 
that has two groups of four edges on the same side.  Then move half of 
the edges to the opposite side.  Then move half of the edges from the top 
to the bottom and half of the edges from the bottom to the top, but do so 
in a way that separates them into groups of two.  You are then with a 
couple of twist of making a cube.

The beauty of the strategy is that to obtain perfect final symmetry, you 
first take it to a position of maximum asymmetry.  Every turn after that 
keeps it symmetric.

This method will not generally be the optimum solution but it is straight 
forward and easily learned.

I said this is related to the previous subject of swapping two edges 
because both require reaching a position will all the edge pieces on one 
side.  I might not have ever found the method for swapping two edges if I 
had not first adopted this method for getting it into a cube shape first.


While I am sending out a message let me recommend that everyone include 
their mail address when the send a message.  Recently a couple of 
messages did not.  I would have send the author a personal message 
answering a simple question but didnt want to bother everyone else.  One 
such question was about obtaining 3x3x3 cubes.  They are available in 
many chain toy stores including "The Game Keeper" and "LearningSmith".  
Most puzzles are available from Puzzletts also.

I also notice that several local stores are carrying Rubiks Magic again. 
 The colors are different than the originals.



Cube Trivia....
In 1982 a Worlds Fair was held in Knoxville Tenn. USA..  At the enterance 
to the Hungarian pavalion was a Rubik's Cube about 4 feet on a side 
mounted on a pedistal.  At that time a Rubik's Cube was a universially 
recognized symbol.



Walter Smith
near Washington D.C.
WALTS@FEDERAL.UNISYS.COM







