From cube-lovers-errors@curry.epilogue.com  Thu Jan 30 01:31:45 1997
Return-Path: cube-lovers-errors@curry.epilogue.com
Received: from curry.epilogue.com (localhost [127.0.0.1]) by curry.epilogue.com (8.6.12/8.6.12) with SMTP id BAA22508; Thu, 30 Jan 1997 01:31:44 -0500
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@curry.epilogue.com
To: Cube-Lovers@AI.MIT.EDU
From: Wei-Hwa Huang <whuang@ugcs.caltech.edu>
Subject: Taiwan Cube-Solving Invitational
Date: 29 Jan 1997 20:13:35 GMT
Organization: California Institute of Technology, Pasadena
Message-ID: <5cob1f$jiq@gap.cco.caltech.edu>

This is from China World News, 12/17/1996.
The translation is mine.  I can't vouch for any facts in
the article or give any more information.
(I also find a few of the claims a bit exaggerated
and redundant, but what do you expect from the media?)

-------------------------

NEW MAGIC CUBE REVEALED; WELCOMING ALL SPEED SOLVERS
Easy Disassembly Provides a Higher Difficulty of Play;
Taiwan Hosts Invitational Competition; Throws the Gauntlet
to USA, Europe, etc.

[TAIPEI] The craze that mesmerized Taiwan is back.  This new
generation of Rubik's Cube emphasizes its ability to be 
disassembled and assembled.  Play and difficulty are enhanced.
This cube researched and developed by Taiwanese won a gold in the
International Invention Competition (?) in Los Angeles this
past September.  This new Cube is also the focus of 1997's 
International Magic Cube Solving Invitational.  The hosts, intending to
promote basic inventive education, especially welcome youths
to enter the solving competition and challenge their intelligence.

The Chief Organizer of the sponsor of next year's International Cube 
Solving Invitational, the Republic of China's Invention Group,
Chi-Shin (?) Huang [no relation] said that superb inventors always
have three traits: they're capable of prolonged concentration, 
stamina, and will.  Most importantly, that have the trait of 
action: they know what they want to do and they do it.  And this
is a trait they have in common with cube-solvers.

Huang especially emphasizes that the young people now pick up this
toy of the previous generation, since the Rubik's Cube is a
puzzle requiring hand-eye coordination, and in the process of
solving, not only does it help build spatial abilities and 
memory, but also trains the brain in pattern recognition and
organization.  And as far as creativity is concerned, cube solving
is good practice for sustained concentration and patience.

Jein-Chen Zhu (?), a professor at Taiwan University who has
written a book analyzing the mathematical principles of the
cube comments: "This new generation of the Cube is challenging
because it breaks the rules of the original Cube."  Zhu also
said that most speed solvers finish the buttom face first,
and then work towards the upper levels.  Since the new Cube can
be disassembled and the corner cubies rearranged, the new
Cube may have no valid solutions with that method.  "Therefore,
if a solver picks an incorrect starting face, it would be like
building a bridge on top of a riverbed with hidden sand streams:
almost impossible.  The solver must be able to make quick decisions
to finish the solution.

The inventor of the new Cube, Wei-Huang Chang (?) [no relation]
indicates that the breakthrough in his design is that the Cube
can now be easily disassembled, allowing players to observe with
their own eyes the three-dimensional secrets in the structure of
the versatile cube.  The original inventor of the Cube, Rubik,
was himself an expert in the field of construction and originally
invented the cube as a teaching tool.  The new Cube would not
exist without the original design.

The 1997 Competition is projected to be in September.  The 
Committee invites any players from Japan, Korea, Mainland China, Europe,
America, etc. to attend.  No age restriction.  If interested,
please phone (area code 02) 5812314.  [Country code, Taiwan ROC]

----------------------------------

Magic Cube Solved in 19 Seconds
WEN-YUNG KAO (?) IS THE FASTEST SOLVER IN TAIWAN

[TAIPEI]"Mr. Cube" Wen-Yung Kao's fastest solving time is nineteen seconds.
Compared to existing records, he is 2 seconds faster than the 
world record, 22.95 seconds.  

"A Cube solver must make decisions quickly and correctly!" says
Kao, who is a successful industrialist by day.  When he solves 
the cube, all ten of his fingers dextrously spin the cube; in
the last few seconds of his solution, he finishes the solution 
without even having to look at the cube, truly a sight to behold.

Kao notes that actually, there's a trick to solving the cube; he
has had to go through meticulous recordings and observations to
discover it.  He recalls his first encounter with the cube: a
friend of his had started up a factory set to making the cube
and had sent a few to him to play with.  He was immediately 
hooked and spent umpteen hours testing, taking notes, and 
recording the path of every little cubie.  After one month,
he could solve the cube in three minutes.  After half a year
he was even faster, solving in under one minute.  After 20
more months he had cut his time down to 25 seconds.

[TAIPEI]Sixteen years ago the cube-solving craze spread the 
globe.  Due to the complexity of the combinations, a few
turns could make it difficult to restore to its original
state, easily discouraging a would-be solver.  Taiwan inventor
Ji-ren Chang (?) researched the "Gold Key Cube", which 
can be easily disassembled and reassembled, decreasing the
feeling of discouragement.

[PHOTO] CEO of a food company, Wen-Yung Kao is Taiwan's fastest
Cube solver.

[PHOTO] Inventor Ji-Ren Chang's invention "Gold Key" can disassemble
the Cube.

--------------------------



--
Wei-Hwa Huang, whuang@ugcs.caltech.edu, http://www.ugcs.caltech.edu/~whuang/
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Save the earth.  Then Quit and Shut Down.


