From cube-lovers-errors@curry.epilogue.com  Thu Apr  3 12:16:11 1997
Return-Path: cube-lovers-errors@curry.epilogue.com
Received: from curry.epilogue.com (localhost [127.0.0.1]) by curry.epilogue.com (8.6.12/8.6.12) with SMTP id MAA01927; Thu, 3 Apr 1997 12:16:11 -0500
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@curry.epilogue.com
Message-ID: <01BC4004.EC0AAA20@p10.ts3.danve.MA.tiac.com>
From: Karen Angelli <kangelli@tiac.net>
To: "'Cube-Lovers@AI.MIT.EDU'" <Cube-Lovers@ai.mit.edu>
Subject: Cube History: Triumph and Defeat
Date: Thu, 3 Apr 1997 07:58:25 -0500

A recent addition to the Cube-Lovers list, I would like to share one of
the least known events in the history of Cube entertainment, and its
repercussions in the mass media and ultimate disgrace of one of the most
powerful men in entertainment.

It was the early '80s and Rubik's-Cube-Mania was all the rage.  Although
not nearly as accomplished as some of this list's members were, I could
solve the cube in about one minute.  I was also a lifeguard at a public
pool, and a locally renowned under-water swimmer (with a personal best
of 75 meters).  With such amazing and narrowly acclaimed accomplishments
in such diverse fields of endeavor, it was only natural that I would
feel public pressure to combine the two.  Thus was born underwater cube
solutions.

I took my best lubricated cube, a dive mask and a weight belt, and
started solving the cube in 10 feet of water.  After several practice
attempts, to ensure that I could hold my breath long enough to complete
the cube, I volunteered my services to the local synchronized swimming
club which was looking for an opening act for their show.

The show took place before a not so overflowing crowd during the busiest
season of the year, the local Nordic Fest celebration of Scandinavian
heritage.  The international crowd of aquatic enthusiasts was stunned
when I was introduced.  My bikini clad assistant handed the pristine
cube to one of the audience members to randomize and returned to me.
Then, in four and a half feet of water, I submerged and started solving
the cube.

After about 10 seconds of hurried twisting, I dropped the cube and lost
my place - I had to start over.  In practice, it had never taken me more
than about 1 min, 15 seconds to solve the cube, and I had practiced
holding my breath comfortably for about 1 min, 25 seconds.  I wasn't
sure whether I would complete the task.  After about 1 min 30 seconds,
my sister started yelling for someone to help me.  However, at the 1 min
38 second mark, I surfaced - to thunderous applause.  Certainly one of
the greatest moments of cube history.  How sad that this would lead to
infamy and no greater laurels.

After hearing the story of how I wowed a normally reserved Iowan crowd,
my classmates in college in Pennsylvania encouraged me to find a larger
audience, on a national stage.  Naturally, I wrote to NBC's Late Night
with David Letterman to pitch my idea for a stupid human trick.
Uncharacteristically, however, Dave turned down a good idea.  I haven't
forgiven him since.

I hope I haven't disappointed any Dave fans out there, but the truth had
to surface some day.  Thanks for keeping the flame alive Cube-lovers.

Pete Reitan



