From cube-lovers-errors@oolong.camellia.org  Sun Jun  1 00:58:07 1997
Return-Path: cube-lovers-errors@oolong.camellia.org
Received: from oolong.camellia.org (localhost [127.0.0.1]) by oolong.camellia.org (8.6.12/8.6.12) with SMTP id AAA28890; Sun, 1 Jun 1997 00:58:06 -0400
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@oolong.camellia.org
From: SCHMIDTG@iccgcc.cle.ab.com
Date: Sun, 1 Jun 1997 0:19:28 -0400 (EDT)
To: cube-lovers@ai.mit.edu
Message-Id: <970601001928.2140f226@iccgcc.cle.ab.com>
Subject: Re: Searching and Metrics in (Korf 1997)

Dan Hoey wrote:

>I've read through Rich Korf's paper now, and I have a few ideas on the
>paper and how the method might be improved...

I feel that there is a fundamental point regarding cube solving approaches
that is worth making.  First there is what I shall call the "Kociemba approach".
I would loosely paraphrase this approach as follows:

"If one examines the behavior of the cube in great detail and applies group
theoretic concepts to the spaces generated by the cube, one can apply this
analysis to great effect towards producing an algorithm capable of solving
the cube."

Then there is what I shall refer to as the "Korf approach".  Loosely
paraphrased as:

"The cube is a difficult combinatorial puzzle that provides a fertile
ground for advancing the state of the art of search methods."

It should be apparent that the goal of these two approaches is quite
different.  The "Kociemba approach" is focused only on solving the
cube.  All domain specific knowledge about the cube problem, such as
specific group theoretic properties of the cube, can and should be
applied.  Whereas the "Korf approach" attempts to be a general
approach, applicable to other problems, not just the cube (i.e. the
cube problem is merely incidental).  This approach should not rely
on methods that are specific to a single (or at least very narrow)
class of problems.  This is close to the definition of so called
"weak" methods in AI.  Weak methods are those that do not rely
heavily on human provided domain specific knowledge.  For example,
an expert system does not classify as a weak method, whereas a
search method that is given little more than a description of
the problem space and a desired goal does.

Stepping back a bit, I would say that Korf's method applies to
a broad class of problems, much larger than the cube alone.  In
effect, his method says:

"If one can partition the desired end goal of a problem into subgoals,
and for each subgoal provide a cost to achieve that subgoal, then one
can use this information to produce a higher quality (i.e. "more informed"
in search parlance) heuristic.  An effective way to achieve this is by
firt precomputing the cost information associated with each subgoal and
storing it in a table.  This table can be reused across multiple problem
instances and represents an effective way to utilize available memory
to improve the effectiveness of the search."

And so I feel it is necessary to say that any suggestion for improving
Korf's method, should take this distinction into account since solving
the cube is only incidental to the emphasis of the research work that
professor Korf is involved in.

In no way am I intending to imply that methods which are not consistent
with the "Korf approach" should not be considered.  In fact, I find this
a fascinating topic.  I'm just pointing out it is both a virtue and a
goal of his approach that he hasn't leveraged extended knowledge of
"cube principles" in order to devise an effective algorithm.

I hope I haven't misrepresented Mr. Kociemba or Mr. Korf in this
discussion.  If so, please speak up.

-- Greg


