From cube-lovers-errors@oolong.camellia.org  Thu Jun  5 22:58:32 1997
Return-Path: cube-lovers-errors@oolong.camellia.org
Received: from oolong.camellia.org (localhost [127.0.0.1]) by oolong.camellia.org (8.6.12/8.6.12) with SMTP id WAA09163; Thu, 5 Jun 1997 22:58:32 -0400
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@oolong.camellia.org
From: SCHMIDTG@iccgcc.cle.ab.com
Date: Thu, 5 Jun 1997 22:56:56 -0400 (EDT)
To: cube-lovers@ai.mit.edu
Message-Id: <970605225656.21412b24@iccgcc.cle.ab.com>
Subject: Categorization of cube solving programs

Cube Lovers,

Since I'm interested in such things, I came up with the following
categories of cube solving programs in general order of increasing
sophistication:

Class 1:	Simply provide a simulation of the cube and allow the
		user to manipulate the cube model via some cube
		operator notation (e.g. Singmaster).  May also allow
		the user to save/restore/replay lists of moves and
		possibly to build up sequences of "macro operators".
		Might allow the user to input a given cube state.
		Might also allow the user to 'solve' the cube by
		replaying all user made moves in reverse.  Often
		these programs have very nice 3D graphics.

Class 2:	A program which solves the cube by implementing a
		canned algorithm (or 'book procedure').  Basically,
		a straight forward implementation of a known
		cube solving process.  These programs generally
		work through a series of stages to solve the cube
		and do not generally produce optimal solutions.

Class 3:	A program that when given a specific instance of the
		cube, attempts to 'discover' or learn a sequence which
		will solve that particular instance.  That sequence is
		not usually considered general purpose since it will only
		apply to solving from the given position.  It may be
		possible to find a minimal sequence tailored to the
		given position.  The Kociemba and the recent Korf
		program fall into this category.  These programs
		are capable of discovering optimal or near optimal
		solutions to a given cube instance.

Class 4:	A program which attempts to discover an ALGORITHM to
		solve ALL randomized cubes.  The program starts off only
		with a model of the cube and attempts to discover a general
		procedure which solves all permutations of the cube.
		Korf wrote a program to do this in the mid 1980s.
		The program was able to learn a complete set of
		sequences (a.k.a. 'macros') sufficient to solve any
		scrambled cube.  The resulting algorithm is very
		much like a Class 2 algorithm as it works in stages
		to solve the cube and does not generally produce
		optimal solutions.  I believe Korf's program is
		the only program ever achieved that can be placed
		in this category.

Needless to say, I find Class 3 and Class 4 cube programs the most
interesting.  Someday, I would like to develop a Class 4 program
of my own that works on principles that differ from the Korf
program.

-- Greg


